###Chinese Quartet DNA reference materials

With the rapid development of sequencing technology and the dramatic decrease of sequencing costs, DNA sequencing has been widely used in scientific research, diagnosis of and treatment selection for human diseases. However, due to the lack of effective quality assessment and control of the high-throughput omics data generation and analysis processes, variants calling results are seriously inconsistent among different technical replicates, batches, laboratories, sequencing platforms, and analysis pipelines, resulting in irreproducible scientific results and conclusions, huge waste of resources, and even endangering the life and health of patients. Therefore, reference materials for quality control of the whole process from omics data generation to data analysis are urgently needed. 

We first established genomic DNA reference materials from four immortalized B-lymphoblastoid cell lines of a Chinese Quartet family including parents and monozygotic twin daughters to make performance assessment of germline variants calling results. To establish small variant benchmark calls and regions, we generated whole-genome sequencing data in nine batches, with depth ranging from 30x to 60x, by employing PCR-free and PCR libraries on four popular short-read sequencing platforms (Illumina HiSeq XTen, Illumina NovaSeq, MGISEQ-2000, and DNBSEQ-T7) with three replicates at each batch, resulting in 108 libraries in total and 27 libraries for each Quartet DNA reference material. Then, we selected variants concordant in multiple call sets and in Mendelian consistency within Quartet family members as small variant benchmark calls, resulting in 4.2 million high-confidence variants (SNV and Indel) and 2.66 G high confidence genomic region, covering 87.8% of the human reference genome (GRCh38, chr1-22 and X). Two orthogonal technologies were used for verifying the high-confidence variants. The consistency rate with PMRA (Axiom Precision Medicine Research Array) was 99.6%, and 95.9% of high-confidence variants were validated by 10X Genomics whole-genome sequencing data. Genetic built-in truth of the Quartet family design is another kind of “truth” within the four Quartet samples. Apart from comparison with benchmark calls in the benchmark regions to identify false-positive and false-negative variants, pedigree information among the Quartet DNA reference materials, i.e., reproducibility rate of variants between the twins and Mendelian concordance rate among family members, are complementary approaches to comprehensively estimate genome-wide variants calling performance. Finally, we developed a whole-genome sequencing data quality assessment pipeline and demonstrated its utilities with two examples of using the Quartet reference materials and datasets to evaluate data generation performance in three sequencing labs and different data analysis pipelines.

###Construction of reference datasets

To establish small variant benchmark calls, we selected variants concordant in multiple call sets and Mendelian consistency in the Quartet family. First, we kept variants supported by most call sets. Small-variant genotypes were retained, if supported by (1) at least 2/3 replicates in one batch, (2) at least 4/5 batches by PCR library preparation and 3/4 batches by PCR-free, and (3) both PCR and PCR-free library preparation methods. More than 6 million variants were called across 27 gVCF call sets for each Quartet sample, and 1.4 million irreproducible variants were removed by this filtering process.

We then checked Mendelian inheritance status within the Quartet family of father-mother-twins for those remained reproducible variants. The number of Mendelian violations was much higher than what would be expected due to de novo mutations or somatic mutations arose from cell culture, therefore Mendelian violations are assumed to be probably artifacts. We filtered 0.45 million Mendelian violated small variants and kept 4.2 million consensus small variants for each Quartet DNA reference material, which were shared by the identical twins and followed Mendelian inheritance laws with parents.

Small variant benchmark calls were validated by PacBio circular consensus sequencing (CCS) reads and the Axiom Precision Medicine Research Array (PMRA). False positives confirmed by Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV) were removed.

We used the same strategy to establish structural variant benchmark calls. Since the detection of duplications (DUPs), inversions (INVs) and breakends (BNDs) varied between different pipelines, we only considered insertions (INSs) and deletions (DELs) into structural variant benchmark calls. To select reproducible structural variants, we first merged clustered variants of the same type in a single call set, for a large structural variant may be incorrectly called as multiple adjacent small structural variants. This left ~90,000 structural variants in 30 call sets for each Quartet sample. Reproducible structural variants were selected if supported by at least six pipelines of one platform or two sequencing platforms by any pipeline. Then, large structural variants (over 10Mb) and structural variants located in centromeres, peri-centromere, and gaps regions were excluded.

We merged the four Quartet integrated structural variants catalogs and re-genotyped them in a pedigree by three genotypers (Sniffles, SVjedi, LRcaller) from two sequencing platforms (PacBio Sequel and ONT). A total of 23,891 structural variants were retained, which were supported by at least 6/10 re-genotyped call sets. Among them, 4760 structural variants were Mendelian violations and removed. Finally, about 15,000 structural variants were kept as benchmark calls for each Quartet DNA reference material. We observed expected peaks for INSs and DELs near 300bp, 2.1kb and 6kb corresponding to Alu elements, SVA elements and full-length LINE1 elements respectively, consistent with published studies. Structural variant benchmark calls were then validated by short-read, linked-read and optical and long-read assembly-based call sets.

Benchmark regions of structural variants were established from high-depth sequencing PacBio Sequel assemblies. The benchmark regions of the twin’s cover ~2.62Gb of the reference genome (GRCh38; chr1-22), which contain 12,705 structural variants (7008 INSs and 5697 DELs). The benchmark regions of F7 cover ~2.59 Gb and 12,830 structural variants (6785 INSs and 6045 DELs). The benchmark regions of M8 cover ~2.59Gb and 12,634 structural variants (6568 INSs and 6066 DELs).


###Availbility of datasets and materials
1. Quartet DNA reference materials
   Quartet Data Portal https://chinese-quartet.org/#/materials
2. Quartet DNA benchmark sets
   Quartet Data Portal https://chinese-quartet.org/#/reference-datasets/download
   Zenodo https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10076261
